---
title: Walk Text Adventure Game
layout: post
tags: [octave, game]
uuid: 3d597eab-e922-3eca-1a47-6211b34b9a9b
---

*I wrote this thing back in September 2005 when I had to learn Matlab
for work. This writeup was done about year later.*

* [/download/walk.tar.gz](/download/walk.tar.gz) (33.72KB)

This was a text-adventure engine I wrote when I was starting to learn
Matlab programming, which means the Matlab code here is pretty
horrendous. It may or may not work in GNU octave, I didn't bother
checking. That's because I later wrote a Perl version that does the
same thing (when I was still starting with learning Perl, so not much
better). Included is a sample "world" to explore (in English and pig
latin!). The format for the "world" is a really simple one, probably
missing a lot of features of a real text adventure scripting language.
Have fun!

This is what it looks like,

    Welcome to Walk. Just type in plain English into the 'Action:' line what you
    want to do.

    Type 'inv' to display the inventory.
    Type 'clc' to clear the screen
    Type 'look' or 'ls' to get the current description of the room.
    Type 'save' to quicksave the session.
    Type 'load' to restore the quicksave session.
    Type 'doc' or 'help' to see this message again.
    Type 'quit' to quit.

     Action: look

     You appear to be in a small bedroom. There are no windows. Light is
    provided by a small ceiling lamp. There is a brown wooden door, a small bed
    with no sheets, a small box which is laying on the bed.

     Action: _
